---
title: 'Paradoxically Limiting Paradoxes'
publishedAt: '2025-04-18'
lastUpdated: '2025-04-18'
description: 'Implications of the freedom paradox'
englishOnly: 'true'
banner: '/images/blog/carnivorous-plants/sundew.jpg'
tags: 'politics,freedom paradox,philosophy'
---

Freedom hides a snake in the grass.

Like Jörmungandr of Nordic mythology, freedom can eat itself. Subtly slithering
around within it is a contradiction: unchecked freedom means I am free to limit
the freedom of others. This is the danger of absolutism: when taken to its
limit, even our best ideas turn in on themselves. A society that tolerates
everything cannot stand. A democracy that lets the majority rule unchecked can
vote itself into tyranny. A platform that allows all speech, no matter how
hateful or false, becomes unusable for everyone else.

What sounds like an absurd philosophical riddle from a university classroom is a
daily reality. And once you start looking, these paradoxes aren’t just lurking
in the grass—they’re shaping the way we live, vote, argue, and scroll.

# Paradoxes

### The Freedom Paradox

Freedom sounds like a no-brainer at first blush. Obviously, we all should be
free to do what we want with our lives. Just as obviously, we can can see how we
would quickly run into zero-sum scenarios: my freedom to blast music at 2am
conflicts with your freedom to sleep. In a truly unregulated market, you could
hire a hitman to eliminate the competition—and no one could stop you. You could
exploit others, manipulate markets, and form monopolies.

Real freedom, paradoxically, needs boundaries.

### The Paradox of Democracy

In a true democracy, you can vote for democracy's death. It suffers from the
same enigma of absolutism and limits.

Majorities can elect to strip rights from minorities or elect authoritarian
leaders. Huh, that sounds familiar... but am I talking about America or the
Weimar Republic. The world is rife with examples.

### The Paradox of Tolerance

Karl Popper's
[famous insight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_tolerance): society
tolerating the intolerable leads to a society of intolerance, as the intolerant
don't tolerate the tolerant. Tolerance, ironically, requires intolerance of
certain ideas.

Otherwise, the system dies.

### The Paradox of Pluralism

Pluralism exists when many factions, corners of society, and stratified groups
coexist and benefit from a seat at the table. The paradox arises when one of
those groups thinks that they should sit at the table over others. You see this
with anti-pluralist ideologies like fascism, religious movements attempting to
integrate state and law with sacred texts, or extreme ethnonationalist
movements.

Is it pluralism to allow pluralism to be dissassembled?

## Modern Manifestations

### Freedom → Twitter/X and Forced Speech Exposure

Elon Musk's purchase of Twitter was heralded as a restoration of "free speech".
In practice, it's narrower: a restriction of moderation and curation.

He was to abolish all those absolutely _dastardly_ platform policies limiting
free speech (if only you could see my heavy eye roll) and return the right to
say whatever you want, however you want and no one was going to be able to take
down your posts: a free speech absolutist's utopia. But this subtly alters a
user's choice: absolutism in this sense means no curation based on platform. In
other words my freedom to curate my experience disappears. I would essentially
be forced to scroll past hate speech and users I like. This says nothing of a
company's right to choose what material they host: they are just as handcuffed
if something like section 230 were to be abolished.

Clearly, some limits are rational else you get the paradox explained here.

### Democracy → Abortion Rights & Voter Suppression

Abortion laws in the U.S. are now decided by state majorities—often deeply
unrepresentative due to gerrymandering or voter suppression. In states where
most residents support abortion access, small, motivated majorities can still
pass bans to limit the ultimate freedom: what to do with your own physical body.
Unfortunately, the US constitution and political system is uniquely set up to to
be hamstrung by a
[tyrannical minority](http://amazon.com/Tyranny-Minority-American-Democracy-Breaking/dp/0593443071).

Voter suppression laws, meanwhile, are justified under democratic rhetoric
(“election integrity”) but reduce democracy itself by making it harder for
marginalized groups to vote as has been documented in numerous
[instances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voter_suppression_in_the_United_States),
some current, no matter if you think some of these measures might even be good
ideas _in principle_.

The democratic system is being used to reduce democratic participation. That’s
the paradox in action.

### Tolerance → Hate Speech, “Wokeness,” and Weaponized Victimhood

I will preface this section by saying: the gripes I have with this topic aren't
limited to one party or the other. Certainly, conversations and progress get
bogged down from this angle by requirements from the left to walk on egg shells
and speak using the menu of acceptable lexicon.

Even so, the right to offend has become a shield for idiocy and in some cases,
hate. In the name of tolerance, platforms and public spaces allow people to
punch down—targeting the very people those spaces were meant to include.
Simultaneously, any resistance—calls for boundaries, or content moderation—is
painted as “cancel culture.” This is strategic: weaponizing victimhood to
silence criticism.

Tolerating intolerance gives intolerance the upper hand. Here it is in action.

## Subtler Renditions

### NIMBYism and Popper in the Suburbs

I recently read an excellent article in the Atlantic on the quiet loss, over the
past 50-ish years, of America's unique freedom to move and reinvent yourself.
The ramifications are quite keenly felt today, yet which are sometimes
mislabeled as and misattributed to "housing shortages", "wage stagnation" and
"hollowing out of the middle class". The
[article](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2025/03/american-geographic-social-mobility/681439/)
is worth the read, as is the book it talks about (Yoni Appelbaum’s _Stuck: How
the Privileged and the Propertied Broke the Engine of American Opportunity_),
but lurking in the shadows of this analysis of reduced American mobility was a
subtle rendition of the paradox of democracy. To use the article's pithy
summation: "A nation that had grown diverse and prosperous by allowing people to
choose their communities would instead empower communities to choose their
people." A self-interested group of urbanists collared the open systems of
mobility that they _themselves_ benefitted from, statically preserving their own
interests over the benefits such a system visits upon all. The current name for
this movement is NIMBYism, an especially pernicious political phenomenon given
that most its purveyors subscribe to ideals in direct opposition: those of
inclusion and social equality.

### The Paradox That Wears a Red Hat

If NIMBYism is a quiet paradox—democracy used to block access, dressed in local
ordinances—then MAGA is its loud, ignorant, populist cousin. It shouts about
freedom, liberty, and the Constitution, while simultaneously advocating for
authoritarianism, censorship, and ethnic or cultural homogeneity.

The MAGA movement presents itself as a grassroots, pro-freedom revolution. But
beneath the surface, its ideological core reveals a slew of contradictions:

– Freedom of speech? Yes—for them. But call out racism, question police
violence, or teach history that makes them uncomfortable? That’s
“indoctrination.” – Government tyranny? Terrifying—unless it’s their guy doing
the tyranny. The same people crying about mask mandates cheer on state bans of
books and drag shows. – Democracy? Crucial—until the results don’t go their way.
Then it’s rigged, corrupt, and possibly deserving of a violent overthrow or
fulfulling the manifest destiny of the "true" winner through
[_*STEALING*_ an election](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attempts_to_overturn_the_2020_United_States_presidential_election).

This is the paradox of democracy and pluralism in full bloom: a group uses
democratic power to dismantle democratic norms. It demands inclusion in a
pluralistic society while rejecting the legitimacy of other worldviews,
lifestyles, or ethnic groups.

The movement also weaponizes nostalgia—a yearning for a fictional past where a
narrow version of “America” was supposedly better. But the great irony is that
the very freedom and diversity that made America great are now cast as threats
to be eradicated. The system that gave rise to MAGA is the one it seeks to
destroy.

MAGA doesn’t just live inside a paradox—it thrives on it. That’s what makes it
rhetorically powerful and politically dangerous. And stupid. I'd be remiss to
forget that adjective.

## The Design Dilemma: Building Systems to Limit the Paradoxes

Cool, now we have identified some philosphically paradoxical ideas, notions and
actions. Philosophers stop here. We don’t have to, but what do we do?

These paradoxes don’t mean we abandon freedom, democracy, or tolerance. But they
do mean we can’t afford to be lazy with them.

We must design systems that limit their extremes. That’s the trick: a strong
system doesn’t give you the illusion of freedom—it gives you boundaries that
protect it. Like seatbelts. Like fire codes. Like content moderation. Like
disinformation regulation.

Thinking in terms of these limits gives you consistent ethics, it doesn't tear
them down. These aren’t infringements on liberty: they’re what make liberty
_possible_. To build society without them is to build a house of cards.
Constraints-as-design limit the subjective logic of things like gerrymandering,
christian/sharia law, and the madness of crowds.

Freedom hides a snake in the grass. But if we know where it slithers, we can
avoid the bite. True freedom—like true democracy—isn’t a free-for-all. It’s
something we have to build, maintain, and defend from its own excesses.
