---
title: 'On Intelligence and Personal Limits'
publishedAt: '2025-02-28'
lastUpdated: '2025-02-28'
description:
  'A comment on the implications of social policy given the preliminary state of
  neuroscience'
englishOnly: 'true'
banner: '/images/blog/intelligence/brain-intelligence-algorithm-public-neurosciencenews.webp'
tags: 'social policy,neuroscience'
---

> "The remarkable thing is that although basic research does not begin with a
> particular practice goal, when you look at the results over the years, it ends
> up being one of the most practical things the government does." -_Ronald
> Reagan_

In the past couple of decades, neuroscience has benefitted from an acceleration
in research funding, techniques, technology. We have uncovered an astonishingly
immense amount about the brain and how it works (with much, much more to
uncover) with much of that data informing theories that are both unmeasurably
interesting and practically significant.

Recently, I read a books that discussed theory of intelligence at the
neurological level: _The Neuroscience of Intelligence_ (part of the Cambridge
series of neuroscience of psychology) by Richard Haier. I can honestly say that
I have read only a handful of books that have completely shifted my
philosophical foundations from the scientific evidence housed in the pages; this
was certainly one of them. The implications for public policy and social
programs, realistic goals and really everyday hopes for myself and others are
now seen under a new lens. I promise I won't get deep into the nitty gritty of
political views, but I will examine some of the usual solutions and policy ideas
that come from the different factions of American politics.

## PFIT (Parieto-Frontal Integration Theory)

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/intelligence/pfit.ppm'
  alt='Parieto-frontal Integration'
  height={500}
  width={650}
/>

Haier and his fellow researchers offer what, to those familiar with the brain,
is a more traditional view of neurological integration and processing. Evidence
for this theory is multidimensional, resting on imaging research, lesion
studies, and psychometrics. The theory proposes that there seem to be a number
of regions in the brain that underlie intelligent behavior and there seems to be
a clear, structured flow. Sensory data flows through the parietal lobe and is
elaborated on by the frontal lobe, with interactions between the two generating
evaluations and calculations, with the anterior cingulate cortex playing a role
in inhibiting or promotions responses. The PFIT is seen as the "best available
answer" to the question of where in the brain intelligence resides.

Haier's overview teases out a few key concepts:

#### Structure and function

Intelligence is 100% biological, physical phenomenon. Variance in intelligence
is strongly linked to brain structures like gray matter, cortical thickness,
efficiency, and white matter ingegrity. Intelligence can be measured relatively
well through psychometrics and chronometrics, and is individually stable.
Although, under nuanced circumstances like learning new skills, it may be
improved. Less activity (in some regions and under some circumstances)
correlates to higher IQs in many cases (with some nuance), suggesting that
efficient networks play a part in intelligence. All of these metrics are very
predictive of certain outcomes like schooling and socioeconomic status (however,
there is much to dig into there and many confounds to address).

#### Genes' major role

Data overwhelmingly points to genes and gene expression, not environment,
playing the major role in variance in intelligence. While the
genes-to-intelligence relationship remains controversial politically, it is not
so scientifically. We will benefit from reddressing valid concerns given past
historical misuses and terrible ethics of intelligence research and treatment of
disadvantaged research subjects. The most compelling evidence for this is
studies on identical twins raised apart and children raised in different homes
from their parents. These are considered a gold standard for gene and gene
expression studie. The correlation coefficient of intelligence is about 77% and
has been replicated time and time again with large population studies. Despite
failure to identify a single gene as one that _definitively_ is responsible for
differences in intelligence, Haier relays that intelligence is 1) possibly
pleiotropic and 2) broadly accepted as polygenic: meaning 1) one intelligence
gene could affect many dissimilar traits and 2) it is accepted that many genes
contribute in a lot of small ways to overall intelligence.

#### Environment's influence

The same studies that point to genes' influence also point to environment
playing a role in development of intelligence, but the influence is very
nuanced. Nutrition, stable learning environments, and socioeconomic status all
influence cognitive development. Early on, differences in environment account
for a high percentage (around 75% at age 5!) of differences of intelligence, but
this drops to less 20 percent by age 18. Environment plays a part, but it does
not play a part as strongly as we once believed. Early intervention in childhood
to improve outcomes, like public policy that invests heavily in childhood
schooling to improve test scores, has had very limited effects over the long
term so far. With more understanding of gene expression in relation to
intelligence, this could change.

#### Enhancement is limited

So far, putative intelligence improvement through brain-training and enhancement
abilities are limited, despite a heavy industry built around this idea. While it
was hoped that we might find low cost, low effort interventions like memory
training or listening to Mozart, many findings have been overstated and
underwhelming. The real hope remains intervention through biology and some
extremely interesting pathways are in development (check out
[DREADD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Receptor_activated_solely_by_a_synthetic_ligand),
a method for designing synthetic neuronal receptors and activating them through
synthetic transmitters).

#### Neuroscience should inform policy

Intelligence and socioeconomic factors are deeply intertwined at the
neurological level. Intelligence has a heritable component, but gene expression
is influenced by environmental factors which makes it hard to tell the causal
direction. Both phenomena are associated with differences in the _same_
neurological structures. For example: Lower SES is often associated with chronic
stress (e.g., financial instability, food insecurity, exposure to violence).
Chronic stress leads to dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis and increased cortisol levels, which negatively impact brain
structures like the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. These same brain regions
are crucial for cognitive function and intelligence, meaning that SES-related
stress can influence cognitive abilities, further blurring the distinction
between SES and intelligence. Haier argues that understanding the neuroscience
of intelligence will lead to better interventions on early childhood education
leading to maximized potentials.

## Immediate implications

I had a few of my views absolutely _shattered_ by Haier's summation of the state
of research. Familiar to me was that genes and their expression are the supreme
governors of our individual conditions, but what was _unfamiliar_ to me was how
few broad environmental levers we have at our disposal, besides the basics of
nutrition, stress and poverty, to _influence_ those expressions.

To be honest, all of this probably should not have been too much of a surprise
given findings like the
[ceiling we seem to have hit with longevity](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7243589/#:~:text=Abstract,fixed%20limit%20to%20longevity%20too).
Physical systems have rules and boundaries, and while there is definitely some
wiggle room, eventually you have to intervene on the system itself to make
changes.

Your body's parameters are foisted upon you; _anyone_ can workout all they want,
but their muscle size, physical health and metabolism have upper bounds. Mental
health is an abstraction of physical health, so it comes with limits, too. It is
no coincidence that the most effective and dynamic interventions for entrenched
mental health problems have been physical interventions (not to say therapy
isn't effective, but while therapy also is, at a certain level, changing
physical processes in the brain, the point is it can only do so much without
deeper measures). To break through the gene-imposed limits on phenotypical
features like muscle size, metabolism, hormones, mental health and physical
health, you need steroids, amphetamines, androgens, SSRIs and medicine,
respectively.

It's becoming obvious (and should have been obvious to the general public) that
intelligence is another trait bound by the same laws.

A few obvious dilemmas pop up with this topic, one or two of which drove mini
personal crises for me, that are worth carefully traversing.

## Morality of intelligence research

It's not hard to see the risks to embracing this research path. It's not a new
argument either: abuse and mistreatment on the grounds of intelligence wouldn't
be the first time humans have attempted such a repugnant political pogrom. We
have a long history of terrible regimes justifying horrible treatment of
populations seen as "inferior". This time, we would really have real, better
data. In ages past (even as recently as the
[20th century](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_racism#After_1945)),
these same arguments were made on the back of a lot of propaganda and completely
unethical, bad science driven by agenda instead of genuine pursuit for truth.

While, in innumerable ways, our world is not the same world as even a few
decades ago (read one of my favorite
[books](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enlightenment_Now) ever on it if you don't
believe me), just skimming the current headlines and witnessing the idiocracy
and dumb political beliefs might give you cause for doubting that we can behave
responsibly with knowledge on biological factors of intelligence, or your might
even doubt we could use it effectively. I mean, we're still trying to convince
people about basic, evidence-based findings surrounding things like vaccines,
the earth being round, or depression being a much more complicated problem than
a simple, "changeable" personality trait like laziness, for crying out loud.
Even modern intellectuals and researchers are mired in controversy surrounding
intelligence; just google Charles Murray or E.O. Wilson. All of that is to say:
the hesitance is, if you ask me, probably one of the most understandable things,
well, ever.

Even so, I would argue the landscape isn't quite the same now. Many, many more
ethical bodies, laws, regulations, guiding medical boards, science
organizations, and even the deep knowledge we have attained (which directly
refutes the morally corrupt claims that figures made in the past) won't _allow_
us to go backwards unless all these relevant parties somehow develop amnesia.
It's not a guarantee that there won't be assholes who take data and run with it
or some crackpot will misrepresent the data to make invidious arguments, but in
my view:

1. That already happens today in other arenas (think race and crime statistics
   used to justify all manner of modern bogus theories). We _certainly_ don't
   want more of it, but it wouldn't introduce a new problem (yes, that might be
   a paltry defense on its own).
2. It seems a safe bet that good morals and science will continue to win out as
   they have over the last couple hundred years.

The key word in point 2 is "continue", as good morals and science are what got
us to this more ethical stage of flourishing in the first placeCall me a naive
optimist, but I am just following historical trends.

At the end of the day, humans want to improve our circumstances. If we didn't,
we'd still be living in caves. We have been bending the universe, securing
flourishing for us and our descendents for hundreds of thousands of years. This
drive is at the basis of, well, pretty much _all_ scientific endeavor, the
genesis of which is the Englightenment. The benefit of SSRIs, cancer treatements
and other physical and societal interventions are, to a one, borne of the will
to improve our unplanned genetic and environmental lotteries. Therefore,
improving understanding of biological and genetic bases for intelligence is an
extension of improving understanding of biological and genetic bases for
depression, cancer and other ailments and physical conditions outside of our
control.

The moral argument is quite simply: intervene if we can. We should want to toss
out the chaotic, primordial genetic soup that birthed our species; its
expiration date has passed. Instead, let us adjust this soup's recipe to an
impactful genetic broth with maximal potential. The necessity of suffering only
shifts with knowledge.

# Public policy

I tend to be in favor of preserving and building common-sense public goods,
utilizing public intervention when we can make a good case for it. Providing
pathways for education is a no-brainer to me and I was under the impression that
the reactionary arguments to heavy genetic influence on intelligence were
_right_: I thought that simply sending my kids to good schools will teach them
to be smart and successful. I thought overhauling school systems, a
not-so-uncommon political idea with various attempts at execution over the
years, was a legitimate, effective, and simple solution (at least, relative to
biological solutions) for getting everyone into a higher economic class,
potentiating success, and encouraging individual achievement. It seems I was...
naive. None of this is very simple.

In the middle of this book, I had a small crisis over my political views. I
thought to myself: "Even if we can intervene on intelligence in the future, what
is the point of good education systems _now_ if the upper limit can never be
broken?" In other words, if the best we can hope for is that by going to school
you meet your full genetically-bound potential, but not exceed it, then why dump
public money into a school system that won't ever do what it sets out to do:
shattering through the limits that an environment imposes?

## Should we not knock down our perceived limits?

How do you make morals around known limits? This changes the idea of _should_.
