---
title: 'Sliding Scales of Computation'
publishedAt: '2024-10-17'
lastUpdated: '2024-10-17'
tags: 'philosophy,cognitive science,biology'
description:
  'A brief foray into logical computations of behavior and a few musings about
  what that might mean at higher and lower level animals'
banner: '/images/blog/wetware/protein.webp'
---

> "The cell moves in an informed if not intelligent way."

In _Wetware_, Dennis Bray walks fine lines of definitional scale. The book is a
deep dive into computational biology, sensory signals and organisms' reactions.
By his own admission, he flits from scope to scope with words like "attention",
"memory" and "knowledge", whittling at their meanings until they fit into cell
behavior (and they do, he says). The general thrust of his ideas and arguments
are cells and their proteins are siblings to the digital and analog circuits and
signals, with many similarities to complex neural networks and computers. Yet,
for now at least, silicon-rendered networks on a TPU are to their biological
counterparts as my 3 year old nephew's Play-Doh people are to Michaelangelo's
David.

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/walter-tortoise.jpg'
  alt='Walters tortoise'
  height={500}
  width={650}
/>

## Complex obscurity for simple rules

One of the passages in the book illumines the experiments of William Grey
Walter. Walter set out to prove that simple logical interactions and connections
could result in rich behaviors, so he built simple robotic tortoises that
"behaved" as if they were searching for food, self aware, and had memory and
conditionable reflexes. The tortoises were phototaxis, meaning they exhibited
movement towards light under certain conditions. In the absence of light, they
would explore the area until light was found via a motor with a battery attached
to the wheels, a simple photorecepter mounted in the head, and bump sensors on
the outer shell which kicked off an "object avoidance" movement pattern. The
circuits that controlled the behavior is worth looking up, but in short, signals
from different sensors were amplified or reduced by vacuum tubes and this
affected the motor and steering systems on the tortoise.

Walter built an enclosure with a kennel and a 20 Watt light inside of it. When
the tortoises had full batteries, they were attracted to the kennel from afar
through their light sensor. Upon nearing the light, a "repellent" response was
induced; light sources over a certain intensity resulted in the motor and
steering circuits activating with double the force (arcing the tortoise's path
away from the light source). However, when the batteries were low, the
sensitivity to light decreased and the tortoise was attracted to the kennel
light and would now enter the kennel (before, the light would generate the
"repellent" response), where a battery charger was located, subsequently
recharging and kicking off the whole process again.

These behaviors arose from mixed signals and feedback in certain circuits,
boiling down to simple logical statements. If we take the behavior of the
tortoise being attracted to light when the batteries were low, it can be
represented by the following (with _BL_ meaning the state of low battery, _LP_
meaning there is a light source present and _FL_ standing for "find light", or
the behavior of being attracted to the light):

```
If BL and LP, then FL
```

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/Schematic-of-Grey-Walters-electronic-tortoises-Elsie-and-Elmer-Reproduced-from-Walter.ppm'
  alt='Walters drawings of the tortoise behavior'
  height={350}
  width={650}
/>

With plain logical rules, these tortoises displayed behavior, to a degree, that
single cell organisms (or, arguably, more complex animals) might display, but
even single cell organisms seem to have rudimentary abilities to associatively
learn or "learn by experience". Grey Walter set out to create a new version that
could do the same.

His next iteration ported a sensor's signal that could detect whistles and mixed
that signal with the signals from the bump sensor and the light sensor. This new
circuit allowed the tortoise to be "trained" to come to the whistle as if it
were a light. The humble, plain circuit of Walter's tortoises seemed to serve as
the platform for rudimentary Pavlovian learning, that famous pairing of an
unrelated stimulus to a behavior. What the mixing of signals allowed for is a
basic logical _or_ statement (with _W_ representing the whistle signal, _L_
representing the presence of a light signal and _B_ representing the subsquent
behavior of heading toward the stimulus):

```
If W or L, then B
```

These simple logical statements are the basis for many aspects of programming
and, in Bray's argument, biological phenomena.

## Facades of intelligence

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/Stentor-avoidance-behavior-1024x639.webp'
  alt='Stentor behavior'
  height={400}
  width={550}
/>

Some of the most complex behavior in the unicellular realm comes from _Stentor
roselii_. _Stentor_ is a trumpet-shaped organism that attaches itself to various
surfaces via a mucus-covered foot. At rest, its mouth is open and the fine cilia
inside beat the water to create a current that pulls in particles in the water.
The animal then determines whether the particles are edible and ejects
indegistable particles. When water is squirted into the open mouth, the animal
contracts into a ball, but a second squirt of water is ignored by the animal.
This "surprise" and subsequent "ignore" response was achievable through a host
of stimuli, such as jarring the container the animal was in. This, like the
tortoises, seemed to point to a rudimentary form of "memory" and associative
learning.

When irritants or injurious particles are squirted into the mouth, _Stentor_
will bend to one side (always in the same direction) and move its mouth out of
the path of the inedible particles. The leaning behavior will be repeated a few
times until a more drastic action is taken: the cilia reverse direction and
eject everything in the "mouth" and "stomach" (a pouch in the middle of its
"body"). This particular behavior of ejection via cilia beating reversal will
also be repeated a few times in rapid succession. If the particles are still
encountered, the organism will retract into a ball (the same response to a
surprise stream of water). This retraction will _also_ be repeated a few times,
with the animal cautiously extending and starting to beat its cilia to ingest
particles again after a period of time, as if it is cautiously checking to make
sure the coast is clear.

The _Stentor_ will continue like this for a little bit, but it is obvious that
under the continued circumstances of irritant or injurious particle ingestion,
it will take longer and longer to extend its body from its retracted phase each
time. The experience has "changed" the _Stentor_ and it will try a new strategy
if this negative stimuli does not cease. Eventually, the _Stentor_ will start to
retract and extend repeatedly and violently, breaking the hold that the mucus
around its foot has on whatever surface it has attached itself to. It then uses
its mouth for locomotion and explores nearby surfaces for a time and after 10 or
20 minutes, it performs a complex series of actions to reform its mucus tube,
fit inside of it, and anchor its pseudopodia to the bottom of the inside of the
tube. Afterward, it resumes its normal pose: sampling the water and beating its
cilia to ingest particles in the event they are edible.

All of this is "intelligent" behavior performed by a tiny fluid-filled sac less
than a millimeter in length. These stimuli and behaviors are bound, through
physical and chemical interactions, in logical renderings similar to the
tortoises of William Grey Walter.

## Chemical Logical Operators

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/allostery.png'
  alt='Stentor behavior'
  height={400}
  width={550}
/>

In the same way that Walter's second iteration of tortoises combined logical
operations (`if whistle present, then light attraction behavior` or
`if battery low and light present, then strength of attraction to light increases`),
allostery is the platform for cellular computations and logic. Hemoglobin is as
good a stepping off point as any: as oxygen binds to different sites on a
hemoglobin molecule, the neighboring atoms shift slightly to accomodate the new
oxygen passenger. This subtly changes the hemoglobin structure. Other amino
acids that make it up are now slightly different, meaning _their_ downstream
behavior is altered ever so slightly. With a handful of bind sites, this can
change a protein's behavior drastically.

As molecule _A_ snaps into place and binds to a site on enzyme _X_ specially
suited for it, _X_ transforms into a slightly different shape with a minutely
different structure. It now supports the binding of molecule _B_, and when _B_
binds, _X_ changes shape ever so slightly again. When _B_ is allowed to bind to
protein _X_ (and _X_ subsequently changes shape from this binding), this _also
changes B itself_. Maybe _B_ loses some atoms, gains some, or is altered in some
other way, but now _B_, upon binding, becomes _B'_ ("B prime"). _B'_ doesn't fit
well on _X_'s binding site anymore, so it breaks off. This is an allosteric
enzyme in action. Inhibition _or_ disinhibition (like our example here) can be
achieved, prescribing the logic of an AND operator:

```
If A and B, then B'
```

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/input-output-proteins.webp'
  alt='Inputs and outputs'
  height={400}
  width={550}
/>

Herein lies the connection point to the logic driving Walter's tortoises'
behavior. It's the connection point to many levels of abstraction of the logic
in physical behavior, in fact, including our nerve cells and immune cells. Many
protein interactions constitute logical _or_ statements (if bound here do this,
_or_ if bound there do that) and logical _and_ statements (and those logical
statements sit in different hierarchies of yet _more_ logical statements). Have
you ever wondered how bacterial cells like _E. coli_ know how to turn on their
flagella to propel themselves in a distinct direction, namely toward a food
source?

Attached to the membrane of the _E. coli_ are outward facing receptors made of
proteins with inward-facing structures, also made of proteins. These
outward-facing receptors detect chemicals of interest and at a rate that depends
on the external stimuli, adds phosphate to another protein (CheY, which becomse
CheYp with the phosphate attached) inside the cell via the internal-facing
structures on the inside of the membrane. Once this protein is loaded with
phosphate, it diffuses through the cytoplasm and lands on the internal
structures attached to the base of the flagella. Through a cascade of allosteric
shape changes, influxes of ions and protein interactions, the binding of the
CheYp to the internal base of the motor drives changes in connection and shape
in other parts of the motor and flagella, generating movement.

It's worth a look at an
[explanation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9nZYlyFGm50&ab_channel=XVIVOScientificAnimation)
of the flagella movement or an
[animation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dYt5135_0bs&ab_channel=SmartBiology)
of the protein motors to appreciate just how insanely complex these structures
and mechanisms are. These lesser structures inside the flagella are, in turn,
driven by their own allosteric logic.

```
If chemical of interest present, then bind to receptor and "activate" through allostery.
If receptor activated, then internal kinase and CheY are combined to make CheYp.
If CheYp present, then bind to motor.
If ..., then ...
```

These are the physical "lines of code" driving the sophisticated, programmed
behavior of cells. They are just as bound to the physical world as lines of real
code in software are ultimately bound to the transistors and circuits that make
it up. There is another "block of code" in the receptor that senses relevant
stimuli that performs calculus on the rate of change of environmental stimuli,
essentially performing calculus to determine if the rate of change is up or
down, which is the upstream drive of the flagellar motors.

<Img
  mdx
  publicId='/images/blog/wetware/flagella-motors.webp'
  alt='Stentor behavior'
  height={400}
  width={550}
/>

## Cognition at Scale

Attention has its roots in human consciousness; we first discovered and
described the phenomenon in ourselves and other seemingly-conscious animals.
Yet, from our place in the upper echelons of conscious powers, "attention" oozes
down into the lower depths of the animal kingdom, waning in definitional
complexity, yet seemingly still present in shallower forms. Most microorganisms
display what in higher order animals is termed "attention". As illustrated, _E.
coli_, among other organisms, actively seek new nutrient-rich environments and
"taste" what is in front of them to gauge the best direction to pursue food.
While engaged in this search, they narrow their attention; other normally
immediate response-inducing stimuli like temperature or chemical signals are
ignored (attention probably has its contraints at this low-res level, as it is
likely impossible for a cell to react to two distinct stimuli at once).

At some point in the gradient of complexity of biological behavior and
consciousness, a curious emergence occurs. We humans are able to remove
ourselves from _some_ loops of hard-coded logic; the capability to rewrite and
learn is present at higher orders. We are not always chained to infinite clock
cycles of the same genetic coding like _Sphex_, a species of wasp.

_Spex_'s behavior, at first glance seems future-oriented and sagacious. She,
upon becoming pregnant, captures and stings a cricket in such a way as to
paralyze but not kill it. Afterward, she drags the prey to the entrance of a
previously-dug burrow, leaves it there while checking inside that it is still
clear, returns to the entrance and drags the cricket inside, lays eggs by the
prey's side, carefully seals the burrow, and flies away, leaving the cricket for
her soon-to-be-hatched children (who will subsequently dine on their first meal
of cricket). The behavior is so detailed and clearly goal-oriented, it is hard
_not_ to think the wasp has some ability to think about the future and plan for
it. However, the illusion is shattered quite easily. After dragging the cricket
to the entrance of the burrow, leaving it, and heading inside to check the
burrow, researchers moved the cricket a few inches away from the burrow
entrance. Instead of simply dragging the cricket inside, as _Sphex_ had _just_
checked the burrow, she repeats the same step of dragging the cricket to the
entrance, then heading inside the burrow to check for security. Researchers in
one experiment got the wasp to repeat this step 40 times in a row, clearly
highlighting the hardcoding of this genetically-driven behavior.

> Note: if you haven't read Determined by Robert Sapolsky, look up the chapter
> on Aplysia californica, or, better yet, read through the explanation put forth
> by Eric Kandel that won him a Nobel Prize in physiology. It's an excellent
> model for the same mechanisms of learning and memory present in humans.

At what level does something like "attention" resolve and where does it become
rewritable? Is there a clear boundary along the way? What starting point exists
for cells; no attention, or some attention? We ponder these questions with the
luxury of the 21st century. Science is far from completely understanding the
entire subject, but there is at least agreement on cells not displaying
consciousness and "attention" in the same way that a person might. However, a
watered-down version of the concept is not foreign to the cellular arena.
Despite lacking necessary substrates of nerve cells, neurotransmitters, and
brains that process incoming environmental signals, build memories, render
complex thought and drive responses or behaviors, microorganisms, with their
viscous chemical soups and powers of allosteric proteins, have powerful networks
of communication and logical meaning.

The mechanics of cell locomotion, ingestion and digestion, signal sensing,
reactions to environment and other behaviors are traversed in much greater
detail in Bray's book. In a cell's universe, physics and chemistry are one in
the same (they arguably are at higher orders of resolution, too) and they
constitute the mechanical, logical movement and communication networks of our
arms, muscles, nervous system, hormonal signals and processing, and other
similar systems. When the systems described work in conjunction with each other,
fuzzy forms of "attention" and "memory" and "learning" resolve. Much like our
own neurological structures perform classifications and abstractions, Bray has
pointed out that the logical processes are remarkably consistent on down to
these most minute of resolutions (even some of the proteins are consistent;
actin and myosin are used in the logic of flagellar locomotion and in our own
muscle cells). In each pathway or process, the cell has formed abstractions of
the world. Each of your cells has, embedded in it, a constellation of worldly
chemical and physical meaning and knowledge.

Nobel Prize winning American geneticist Barbara McClintock identified a goal for
future biologists:

> "To determine the extent of knowledge the cell has of itself."
